the containment of China the choking of
China
is common ground for all of them they
simply disagree on how to do it best
whether to do it through the war in
Ukraine or As Trump suggests and the war
in Ukraine and con of
China well thank you so much and thank
you for this opportunity to have um an
intimate closed door discussion so that
um
we can speak
freely so I'm going to cut to the chase
because my topic I think is the most uh
pressing
issue for Humanity at the moment the new
cold war that the United States
Unleashed against China this is not a
shared responsibility it is a decision
by Washington DC to unleash a cold war
against China it started with Donald
Trump it was already
in the making from the Obama
Administration but it has
been reinforced exponentially under Joe
Biden and the reason why I'm saying that
this is the most pressing issue for
Humanity is because we are being quick
marched towards the precipice of a
nuclear
confrontation that the United States
authorities
knowingly
are making a real
possibility and the question is
why the first question and once we go
through the analysis then of course the
second question and of equal importance
is so what do we do about it I enjoy
very much placing American and British
in particular journalists who are part
of this propaganda machine you know
Financial Times Guardian Washington
Post placing them in the difficult
position with a very simple question why
why is the United States declaring
essentially a new Cold War against CH
China and the first the first the first
word that comes out of their mouth is
Taiwan and I said to them what about
Taiwan said well the Chinese want to
take it over well I said they always
wanted to take it over what's new I mean
it was
always the position of Beijing that
Taiwan is a province of China and at
some point they will have to fall under
the fault like Hong Kong did didn't
Richard Nixon know that in 1971 when he
was visiting Beijing making friends with
China didn't Clinton know that when he
was inducting China into the World Trade
Organization why wasn't Taiwan a problem
then what has changed now they they look
at me oh yeah well China is spying on us
the NSA spying on you the CI I have and
that is the truth and the line knows
this we have a three-point NSA tap on me
my phone that is three points means that
if I talk to you you spied on if you
talk to your wife your wife is spy don't
if your wife talks to your child your
spy your your child so I I know that
they've told me that so
I don't believe the Chinese are as good
as the NSA at spying I mean the NSA was
listening in to Chancellor Angela Merkel
this was revealed and then you know when
Angela Merkel was told that immediately
she said okay do you want me to speak
louder so you can hear hear me better so
it wasn't a problem right now suddenly
that China is developing surveillance
and I hope China is developing
surveillance methods because you know if
if you're being spied on you need to spy
back on it's the only way my one of my
great friends and I'm very proud of that
that may shock some of you is Julian
Assange of WikiLeaks and Julian Assange
a very brave man said to me once uh that
what do you do with B Big Brother how do
you stop Big Brother well what you do is
you develop the technology so that you
spy on him while he's spying on you so
counter surveillance is the only way of
dealing with surveillance so that they
know that you know that they know this
is essential for maintaining any degree
of autonomy so I hope China is
developing its capacity to counter the
surveillance of the
NSA um and it's a joke I mean the people
in the NSA are laughing the heads off
when they hear journalists from The Wall
Street Journal saying that the reason
for the new C war is that China is fing
on the on the Americans and then I hear
other idiotic answers like you know the
the Chinese are building Naval vessels
uh they are projecting Naval power well
I will believe this I mean of course
you're building Naval vessels you're
expanding your economy you're expanding
your capacity to um project your own
power that is essential that's what
every every country must do if it
respects its own
interests but I'm going to be worried
about Chinese imperialism when I see
Chinese vessels outside San Diego and
Los Angeles and Chinese army
bases next to El Paso on the US Mexican
border until we see that it is ludicrous
you just look at the map of the Pacific
and you see American bases everywhere
creating choke points for China and this
is their official policy for 40 years
and they have the audacity to say that
China is a threat because China is
anyway enough time wasted on these non-
explanations of the new Cold War now you
may have heard of um well I won't
mention him yet the more sophisticated
analysts in the United States would
invoke the so-called FUSD trap or thusi
curse that to put it in very um V terms
if you live in an anarchic world if you
are a child a boy and you go to school
with a very rough school and there are
lots of
bullies you should be the biggest and
nastiest bully that is the cynical
realist school of thought of American
geopolitics that America in this
anarchic world because they don't really
believe in God they don't believe that
it's a God that will help them they
think that they must be the nastiest
biggest bully in the world in order to
defend themselves their survival as a
nation and their prosperity will depend
on their capacity to bully everybody
else and from preventing anyone who is
getting too big for their boots to
become an equally sized bully and they
will say to you that they wear bullies
around the world like for instance
Imperial Japan Imperial Germany the
Soviet Union and what the United states
have succeeded in doing is effectively
eliminating them annihilating them
getting them out of the way and that now
China is rising China is next and
therefore for that experience a new Cold
War now there's no doubt that the Deep
state in the United States I make no
mistake the United States is not a
democracy it's an oligarchy with
elections that are providing the
legitimacy for this one party state to
continue to exist and when I say one
party State I mean one party State uh
take for
instance Victoria newand you may be
familiar with this Diplomat of the
Washington establishment Victoria nand
worked for Bill Clinton she worked for
George W bush she worked under
Clinton she worked under Trump and no
doubt she was going to work again for
whoever wins in
November Victoria nand is an example of
the single state deep state of the
United States now that deep State single
party establishment United States is
split along the line of two different
conflicting views neither which of which
is good news for
China there is the
the more intelligent
nuanced line of thinking that which in
Academia is uh represented by that very
intelligent man from the University of
Chicago John M mimer the view is this
they they are very
critical of the inability of
Washington to focus Fus on what is
necessary and
their overreach they think that the
United States is overreaching so they
are very critical of the war of the
United States role in firstly through
Victoria
nand creating the circumstances through
the kud against Victor yanukovich the
then president of Ukraine in 2014 they
created a kudeta in
order ethnically to cleanse Russian
speakers from the Eastern side of
Ukraine in order to provoke Putin into
the first stage of war in 2014 against
Ukraine so as to push for NATO expansion
in uh Scandinavia and of course Georgia
and Ukraine and so this pragmatic
Viewpoint simply says that we shouldn't
be doing this because that way we we are
pushing Russia into the arms of
China the whole point of the Nixon
Administration was to split the Soviet
Union from China and therefore win the
Cold War so they're
critical of the support of Ukraine and
of
Israel because they think that this
simply disorient the United States
policy it creates alliances amongst
Americans enemies like alliances between
Russia and China Iran and Russia and so
on and that this is silly politics
because the enemy is China and China
needs to be contained and if you ask
them why does China need to be
contained China doesn't have a history
of imperialism China has absolutely no
interest in uh building military bases
on the US Mexican border in taking you
know Naval power and Pro in it to San
Diego or Los Angeles or San Francisco
China doesn't want that China wants to
trade you know what they say yes we
agree but if we let China become a
regional
superpower in the Pacific area in its
own area in its backyard if we allow
China for instance to become dominant in
the South China
Sea and in the Indian Ocean
then China in the future will start
trying to do what we have done and they
will become an imperialistic force in
the western hemisphere which for them is
the Americans this is what they say they
understand that China is not
imperialistic but they fear that if they
do not contain China through choke
points just north of Indonesia you know
the first array of islands the second
array of islands between China and the
Philippines and so then China
will emulate the United States and
therefore you better prevent that by
choking China today so that's one line
line of argument the second line of
argument is the opposite argument that
the United States must be a bully
everywhere all over the world including
in Europe including the Ukraine and that
for instance I
I have been told that by somebody who
was very high up in the Bush
Administration and who was very high up
in the chain of command of NATO in
Brussels an American Republican he said
to me that we need to expand
NATO against the interest of of the
Europeans he was clear against the
interest of the Europeans and I said to
him Bob why he said because of three
reasons first because we must be in
Europe the United States we to keep
ourselves in number one reason he gave
me number two to keep the Germans down
look at the price of electricity in
Germany today as a result of the war in
Ukraine the German industrial machine is
finished kaput as a result not just of
that but that is one of the reasons and
thirdly to keep the Russ out so this is
you know if you were in the corridors of
power in Washington DC this is the
discussion you would hear
the containment of China the choking of
China
is common ground for all of them they
simply disagree on how to do it best
whether to do it through the war in
Ukraine or As Trump suggests and the war
in Ukraine and con of China well this so
far what I have presented to you is more
or less common knowledge amongst anyone
who's ever been in Washington been in
Brussels spoken to these people to the
cold Warriors to the new cold Warriors
this is common knowledge but I think
that that story that I've given you so
far is
incomplete why did the Clinton
Administration and the Bush
Administration after that were so gangho
about trading with China why did they
not start the new Cold War against China
in the
1990s in the year 2000 in
2004
2005 200 8 why was it only around
2014 that this establishment decided to
unleash the war against China it's not
that they one explanation is that the
Clinton Administration people could not
see that China would develop to the
extent that China developed that it
would become so big I don't believe that
I never believe explanations which
presume the stupidity of the people
involved I don't believe that these
people were stupid and I don't believe
that they didn't see that by shifting
half of American manufacturing to the
West Coast of China sorry to the east
coast of China that you know that China
would not grow and develop they knew it
they were celebrating it I remember you
know for years hearing that you know
capitalism is fantastic because look at
China the moment it introduced the
market economy so and they become a
superpower so they knew it that they
wanted it why don't they want it now why
is it suddenly choking points and
containment and you know putting a boot
on their neck what what really changed
for
me the
essence of the pursuit of a new Cold War
against China by the United States by
the way Europe is irrelevant Europe is
simply doing as it's told Europe doesn't
want to unleash a cold war against China
but you know they get the email from
Washington DC do it and they do
it against their interest and against
their wishes so don't care about the the
Europeans it's Washington if you
we somebody
like you know a strategic thinker like
Henry Kissinger who is now dead but you
know this is the example of the deep
thinking American
official what would you really be
worried about since I mentioned
Kissinger let
me stick to him for a
moment the year was
1970 Kissinger at the time who was
working for President Nixon you'll
recall was not the foreign minister was
not in the is the state department yet
he was the head of the National Security
Council and he was the National Security
advisor to the American president and he
was the epitome all his life of American
strategic thinking the thinking of that
one party State the Deep state of the
United States being a smart man when he
saw the macroeconomic statistics and he
saw that from
1968 from 1968 onwards America for the
first time since the
1930s had become a deficit country for
the first time in its history since it
became a superpower or an important
power in the bid War period and
certainly since the 1950s when it was
the only superpower in terms of economic
superpower the United States slipped
from being a surplus country from having
a surplus in its trade balance uh to
having a
deficit and kid was worried because he
knew that historically speaking
every Empire that went from being a
surplus to a deficit economic entity
started
fading so he got together his people at
the National Security Council and he
asked them a simple
question how should we what should we do
in order to retain our
hegemony now that we are a deficit
country and he said to the people go
away and think about it and I want from
each one of you half a page of a
note very interesting right not 20 Pages
half a page not a page half a page this
is how Kissinger worked and these were
very smart people right most of them
came back and gave a very Germanic
answer if we have a deficit we must cut
down expenditure we must increase uh
interest rates and so on and so forth in
order to reduce Imports and bring about
a balance between exports and imports to
eliminate our trade
deficit one man in his half a page which
I actually acquired in the process of
writing a book 15 years ago typ written
a typewritten half a page he
said what we must do we must treble our
deficit treble our deficit we have a
deficit which is bad we must make it
three times as big and make the
capitalists of the rest of the world pay
for
it which is exactly what happened the
United States should increase its
deficit and use it to create aggregate
demand for the net exports of Germany
and Japan and later on China because it
is the trade deficit of the United
States that sucks into the United States
your aluminum your electric
vehicles deficit dollars like I
us and you know when people ask Paul
vulkanen but will that not affect the
value of the dollar he said no not as
long as it is the
only World Reserve currency the only
currency that has demand people demand
it even if they don't want to buy
anything from the country which is
producing it which is printing it so if
you are today somebody of a mind
comparable to
gingers
then you know that the reason why the
United States is so
hegemonic why it can afford to be the
big bully around the world is because of
the Monopoly of the payment system and
let me give you an example which I gave
uh when we with way way were having this
conversation at China today China now
China now now today
um when Trump was
elected because he hated Obama so deeply
he wanted to take down something that
Obama was very proud of Obama was very
proud of two things
Obamacare and the agreement between the
west and Iran over the nuclear program
of Iran and the ending of the sanctions
which was signed by Iran by the United
States and by the whole of the European
Union enthusiastically
and Trump wanted to destroy that
agreement just because he hated Obama so
he takes the agreement with Iran and
tees it up tears it up the chancellor of
Germany Angela Merkel was very annoyed
because she had worked very hard
together with Obama to bring about that
agreement with
Iran and she German businesses were
already in negotiations in Iran to enter
Iran Iran is a land of opportunity after
so many years of sanctions for large
conglomerates like the German ones
especially when it came to energy to
Consumer products to car manufacturing
they were all ready to get
in and Trump says no Merkel comes out
and gives a press conference against the
president of the United States this is
unprecedented that doesn't happen
often and she says I do not know what
the United States will do we respect
their opinion and their position
position but Germany is going to
maintain the agreement the peace
agreement with Iran and German
businesses will continue to do business
in Iran on the basis of this
International agreement which we are
going to fulfill and which we are going
to honor within 12 hours every single
CEO of every German conglomerate came
out and said not us we're not in we're
out we will follow the Americans
why it's really very simple because they
depended on their net exports to the
United States and the Trump
Administration threatened them that they
would not benefit from the tax cuts the
corporate the the reductions in the
corporate tax that Trump was bringing in
he said to them you want to benefit from
them no business in Iran you want to
maintain your access to the dollar
payment system no business with Iran so
the German Cong con glomerate leaders
turned against the German Chancellor the
day after she gave a press conference
effectively saying sorry Chancellor we
are going with President Trump on this
against their own Financial interests in
Iran and in Europe which is exactly what
they're doing now you know the United
States together with Ukraine bomb the
pipeline northstream one that costs
billions every week for German industry
have you heard a German industry say
anything nothing because they are
dependent on the American trade deficit
but this whole thing for the trade
deficit of the United States to function
as a vacuum cleaner that sucks into the
United States the net exports of Germany
of France of Japan and of China you need
the dollar to
remain the Monopoly the monopolistic
transaction system because it is only
the monop of transactions that allows
the Americans to
continue with unfinanced unfunded
deficits
then you look at the rise of what I call
Cloud capital in the United States and
China by Cloud Capital I'm talking about
what lives in
here the algorithmic capital on which
big Tech is built which is a new form of
capital because unlike like other forms
of capital which are always a means of
production a produced means of
production a robot a tractor is
something you produce to produce
something else this is not a produced
means of production it's a produced
means an artificial means of Behavioral
modification that's what Alibaba is
that's what Tik Tok is that is what
10cent is that is what of course Amazon
Google Facebook and so on they
are capital goods that create nonm
markets platforms that look like markets
but are not markets which allow the
owner of that cloud Capital to bring us
in as buyers as Sellers as influencers
as opinion makers as simply consumers of
entertainment and charge all of us a
form of rent that's enormous power that
the ownership of this Cloud Capital
confers to the owners of cloud Capital
now there are two countries in the world
that have a lot of concentrated Cloud
Capital One is the United States and the
other is China and the reason why you
have it here is because you banned
Silicon Valley Europe didn't ban Silicon
Valley so we all depend on Google
Facebook meta all that and we didn't
develop our own cloud Capital so there's
American Cloud Capital there Chinese
Capital Cloud Capital Chinese Cloud
Capital has an advantage over American
Cloud Capital this is something you've
got to
understand not so much because I mean
your technology is not better than the
Americans in some things you have gone
beyond American capabilities but in
other things the Americans are bigger
and better and faster than you are at
this stage no it's not a technological
advantage that you have it is a
political advantage and an
organizational advantage here in
China The People's Bank the Central Bank
of China controls the bankers in the
United States the bankers control the
central bank they own the central bank
they created the Central Bank the
Central Bank of the United States the
Federal Reserve was
created by JB Morgan it was not the
other way around okay it's important to
understand the institutional differences
between our countries and the United
States the United States is a very very
strange place
so Cloud Capital Silicon Valley in the
United States and finance don't work
together Apple pay exists Google pay
exists so like wej you can pay through
Apple pay but a large segment of that
money goes to Wall Street as a rent so
there is a class like something like
class war between or a fudal l war
between the fom of Wall Street on the
West CO east coast and the fom of cloud
capital on the west coast they're
clashing that Clash doesn't happen in
China because both your Finance sector
and your big Tech or Cloud Capital
sector are under the Communist party I'm
being very honest and Frank with you and
that's a good thing that is an advantage
but if you sitting in Washington
especially after the war in Ukraine
especially after your Central Bank
created the digital one
the digital one is a fantastic invention
you should treasure it and you should
use it and you should develop it and we
have discussions about how to do this
your country has built a digital Super
Highway for
money which is much much more advanced
than the rickety road that is the
American dollar road cuz today that
super wi highway is not used it's like
you know imagine you have you've had
this experience here you build a highway
five Lanes each side but not many cars
are going on it that's what's happening
now with your digital payment system and
the American road which is very old full
of poth holes two lanes not five it's
full of traffic because all the
capitalist profits and trade is being
financed through transactions on that
old highway but already there's a
migration from the American Highway to
the Chinese Super Highway it started
with Russians that's what the Ukraine
wared and then if you're a Saudi
Arabian okay you're a Saudi
Arabian an
oligarch you do most of your business
with the United States you you know you
love your dollars but you're thinking
these people the Americans confiscated
400 billion of the Russians money
because they didn't like the Russians
for whatever it is maybe the Russians
deserve it doesn't matter I'm not making
an ethical Point here okay you think
you're Saudi Arabian I'm not a very good
person myself maybe they will not like
me tomorrow maybe I will do something to
annoy them tomorrow maybe they will take
part of my d right so why don't I
diversify some of that money I will
transact through the Super Highway that
the Chinese have built why do you think
Saudi Arabia is interested in joining
the bricks that's the reason there's no
other reason that is the reason now go
back to what you're looking at that and
you think this super highway that these
Chinese have built is a clear and
present danger to my
Germany that's why they have the chips
act because they want to reduce Your
Capacity to invest in this super highway
and make it attractive for everybody
else this is why they are creating
circumstances of choking anyone outside
the United States wants to trade with
China because they don't want this Super
Highway way so it's not that China is
getting bigger it is not that China is
spying it is not Taiwan it is that China
has built a digital Cloud Capital based
super highway for payments which is a
clear and prais danger to the Monopoly
of the dollar payment system which is
the only reason why the United States is
hegemonic so the question is what do we
do about that allow me just to say four
things very quickly and then I stop this
and then we can take this up further the
first thing you need to do is you must
reduce your dependency on the American
trade deficit but allow me as a
microeconomist to say that you can only
do this is if you increase the weage
share in this country the amount of
money which is essentially ending up in
the pockets of the working class the
working class and the petty Bui and the
middle class in this country because
micro economically speaking it is
impossible under the Cent 5year plan to
have the degree of investment in
manufacturing that is
necessary in order to meet the growth
rates of the 5year
plan without depending on the American
trade deficit the only way of
maintaining this investment and
maintaining the growth rate without
dependency of the American trade deficit
is by boosting aggregate demand
domestically and there are simple ways
of doing that and your digital payment
system is a way of doing it I can
discuss this later if you want that's
number one thing you need to do reduce
your dependency of the American trade
deficit secondly you need to
appeal through soft
power
through
engagement with the local communities in
the global south building a factory or
some infrastructure or some some energy
Hub in Ethiopia or in Namibia or
wherever it contributes to the
development of the local country but
you've got to engage with the local
community you have to take yeah you have
to remember your marks that there is
class conflict happening in Namibia in
the Congo in Ethiopia and the local
ruling class is destroying the prospects
of the local working class and the
Chinese I know you don't want to
interfere in a party political level but
you have to gr you the people of Namibia
must understand that China and Chinese
business and the Chinese presence are
their allies not the allies of their
oligarchy that's how you win hearts and
Minds in Africa you need to do the same
in Europe because in Europe there is a
conservative effort to turn the people
of Europe against the Chinese along the
lines of pure racism
xenophobia orientalism and so on the
same people who are turning the the the
Italians the Greeks the French the
Germans against the Chinese are the
people who are essentially working
towards the diminution of the life
prospects of the Germans the French the
Italians and the Greeks so when for
instance Costco entered the port of fos
I know it that they run the port better
than the Greeks did I know that there is
less corrup corruption and I know that
the work the conditions of the workers
in the port are better now but cost made
a mistake by not engaging in community
relations that's um the third thing okay
um and the fourth
thing soft power within the United
States we must think to together and I
say we I'm not Chinese but I have an
interest in ending the Cold
War uh because it is in the interest of
humanity to avoid firstly nuclear
confrontation and secondly to find a way
of communicating and collaborating to
end
the very fast March of humanity
towards a climate catastrophe without
cooperation it can't happen we cannot
succeed in saving our planet so this is
why I'm saying we it is important to
approach American progressors like I
give you an example the Democratic
socialists of
America who
are becoming have become rather
influential in the United States many of
them are my friends people like Bernie
Sanders they have been sucked into the
anti-chinese
mindset by The Establishment it is
important to bring them
back because they don't understand that
trade Wars are class Wars if you put it
to them that way if we put it to them
that way there's a chance that they will
understand it that the moment you have a
trade War being imposed on China the
American working class is going to
suffer some jobs may be saved through
tariffs if they recreate some
manufacturing job but that won't work
that is not going to work it is not a
situation where you know you stop a few
byd cars from coming to the United
States and suddenly there will be more
manufacturing jobs in Ohio that is
idiocy but we need to convince the
progressives in the United States that
they interests are in deescalate the new
cold war between United States and China
thank you